.TH DSMR-EMAIL-ADMIN 8 "2026" "dsmr-email-admin 1.0" "DSMR mail stack"
.SH NAME
dsmr-email-admin \- health check and repair for the DSMR mail stack
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dsmr-email-admin
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dsmr-email-admin
audits and repairs a DSMR qmail/vpopmail/dovecot mail host.  It targets the
faults that recur when a control or configuration file predates a packaging
fix: a postinst that only creates a file when absent never repairs an existing
one on upgrade, so a host first provisioned before the fix keeps the old value.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B check
Read-only health check across packages, services, the PostgreSQL backend,
dovecot authentication, the qmail-smtpd softlimit, relay rules, and listening
ports.  Exits non-zero if any check fails.
.TP
.B fix \fR[\fB--dry-run\fR] [\fITARGET\fR...]
Repair detected issues.  Each fix runs only when its detector fires, and backs
up the file it changes as \fI<file>.bak-<timestamp>\fR.  Targets:
.RS
.TP
.B softlimit
Raise \fI/var/lib/qmail/control/softlimit\fR to 100000000 when it is lower,
then restart qmail-smtpd and qmail-submission.  qmail-smtpd links OpenSSL and
krb5 and fails to start under a low address-space cap.
.TP
.B pgsql-config
Swap the password and database fields of \fI/home/vpopmail/etc/vpopmail.pgsql\fR
when they are reversed, then regenerate the dovecot SQL conf.
.TP
.B dovecot-sql
Regenerate \fI/etc/dovecot/dovecot-vpopmail-sql.conf.ext\fR from vpopmail.pgsql
and reload dovecot.
.TP
.B pg-cluster
Start and enable the PostgreSQL cluster on the port vpopmail uses.
.RE
.IP
With no target, every detected issue is fixed.
.TP
.B selftest \fR[\fIDOMAIN\fR]
Create a throwaway vpopmail mailbox, inject a message, confirm delivery and
dovecot authentication, then remove the mailbox.
.TP
.B dkim list
List the vpopmail virtual domains and whether each has a DKIM signing key.
.TP
.B dkim genkey \fIDOMAIN\fR \fR[\fB-s \fIselector\fR] [\fB-b \fIbits\fR] [\fB--force\fR]
Generate an RSA DKIM key (default 2048-bit, selector \fBdefault\fR) and install
it as \fI<keydir>/<DOMAIN>:<selector>\fR so qmail-dkim signs outbound
.I DOMAIN
mail immediately, then write a copy-pasteable record file (see
.BR authdns ).
\fB--force\fR is required to overwrite an existing key; rotating a published
selector breaks signatures until DNS catches up.  The key directory is taken
from \fBDKIMSIGNKEYDIR\fR in \fIcontrol/filterargs\fR, else
\fIcontrol/domainkeys\fR.
.TP
.B dkim show \fIDOMAIN\fR
Rewrite and print \fIDOMAIN\fR's record file from its installed key.
.TP
.B dkim verify \fIDOMAIN\fR
Query DNS and report whether the published
.IR selector ._domainkey. DOMAIN
TXT matches the local signing key.
.TP
.B spf suggest \fIDOMAIN\fR \fR[\fB--hard\fR|\fB--soft\fR] [\fB--relay \fIHOST\fR]
Print the recommended SPF record.  The default authorizes the sending host
(this machine's FQDN) with a \fB~all\fR softfail; \fB--hard\fR uses \fB-all\fR.
.TP
.B spf verify \fIDOMAIN\fR
Report whether the published SPF record authorizes the sending host.
.TP
.B authdns provision \fIDOMAIN\fR
Convenience wrapper for \fBdkim genkey\fR plus the record file.
.TP
.B authdns provision-all \fR[\fB--include-external\fR]
Provision every vpopmail domain that has no sender authentication yet.  Domains
that already publish an SPF or DKIM record are skipped: such a domain sends
through some other path, and installing a key here would break it.  Use
\fB--include-external\fR to provision those too.
.TP
.B authdns status \fR[\fIDOMAIN\fR]
Coverage table across the audited domains: signing key present, and whether the
DKIM, SPF, and DMARC records are published in DNS.  The audited set is the
vpopmail virtual domains plus any other domain that already has a signing key
(such as the system domain).
.TP
.B authdns report \fR[\fB-o \fIFILE\fR]
Narrative findings report.  Classifies every audited domain as fully
authenticated (SPF+DKIM), minimally authenticated (one of the two), or
unauthenticated (neither), notes any domain signed locally but not yet
published, and explains the deliverability consequence — chiefly that
unauthenticated domains are rejected by Gmail and Yahoo (\fB550-5.7.26\fR).
Writes to \fIFILE\fR with \fB-o\fR, otherwise to standard output.
.TP
.B authdns verify \fIDOMAIN\fR
Run \fBspf verify\fR and \fBdkim verify\fR for one domain.
.TP
.B reputation audit
Diagnose outbound-IP reputation problems.  Reports the share of the queue that
is null-sender bounces (backscatter), lists the accept-then-bounce recipients
found in queued failure notices and classifies each as a real user with broken
delivery or a non-existent account, flags a \fB~alias/.qmail-default\fR that runs
\fBfastforward\fR without \fB-p\fR (which bounces unknown recipients), and counts
mailbox forwards to external freemail.
.TP
.B reputation probe \fILOCAL@DOMAIN\fR
Test the RCPT recipient gate as a real external sender would see it, by
connecting to this host's own public IP (a non-relayclient path; 127.0.0.1 is a
RELAYCLIENT and would accept anything).  Sends no message body.  A 250 for a
deliberately-invalid address means the gate accepts-then-bounces (backscatter);
a 550 means it rejects cleanly.
.TP
.B reputation purge \fR[\fB--commit\fR]
Purge backscatter from the queue: messages that are both null-sender and
Subject "failure notice".  Dry-run unless \fB--commit\fR, which briefly stops
qmail-send for the deletion.  Real queued mail (which has a sender) is untouched.
.IP
DKIM/SPF management never writes to a nameserver.  Record files are written to
\fI/var/lib/qmail/control/authdns/<DOMAIN>\fR for the operator to publish by
hand, since the hosted domains use a mix of in-house and external-registrar DNS.
.TP
.B version \fR|\fB help
Print version or usage.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /home/vpopmail/etc/vpopmail.pgsql
vpopmail PostgreSQL connection (host|port|user|password|database).
.TP
.I /var/lib/qmail/control/softlimit
Address-space cap applied to qmail-smtpd and qmail-submission.
.TP
.I /etc/dovecot/dovecot-vpopmail-sql.conf.ext
dovecot PostgreSQL connection, derived from vpopmail.pgsql.
.TP
.I /var/lib/qmail/control/domainkeys/<domain>:<selector>
DKIM private signing key (and \fI.pub\fR public key) read by qmail-dkim.
.TP
.I /var/lib/qmail/control/authdns/<domain>
Generated, copy-pasteable SPF/DKIM/DMARC records for manual DNS publication.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dsmr-smtpauth (8),
.BR qmailctl (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Brian O'Reilly <fade@deepsky.com>
